TRISTAN AND ISOLDE
HE first idea of an opera on the Tristan subject came to JL Wagnerin 1854, but he did not begin to work seriously at the theme until the summer of 1857. Recognising that the Ring was not only going to occupy him for some years yet, but that, when ready, it would be almost impossible to produce it under then existing conditions, he planned Tristan and Isolde as a more practicable work for the ordinary German theatre. The score was finished in August 1859; but it had to wait until the loth June, 1865, for its first performance (in Munich, under Hans von Bulaw).

Of all Wagner's operas, Tristan and Isolde is the most difficult to understand ; even after years of acquaintance with it one cannot be quite sure that Wagner's intention has been grasped at every point. There is a good deal in the poem that is obscure; if the motives of his characters were invariably clear to the composer, as we are bound to assume was the case, he has occasionally failed to make them perfectly clear to the spectator, or even to the careful student of the text. While there are few operas more popular, there is probably not one that is the subject of so much misconception on the part of its admirers.

As usual with Wagner, the drama is a synthesis of legends from various sources. The Tristan story is an old one, and apparently Cekic in origin. In its main outlines it runs thus in the most ancient versions we possess, that date from the thirteenth century.

Tristan is the son of a King of Parmenia named Rivalin, who makeshis way to the court of King Markein Cornwall and marries the King's sister, Blanchefleur. Rivalin is killed in battle, and Blanchefleur's sorrow is so great that she dies, in the fortress of Kanoel overseas, in giving birth to Tristan, whose name is thus descriptive of the unhappy circumstances in which he first saw the light. Tristan is brought up by his tutor Kurvenal.

In the course of his adventures he reaches King Marke's court at Tintagel, where he is recognised as the King's nephew and treated with great honour. After his return from a war in Parmenia he finds that Cornwall has been conquered by the Irish King Gurmun, and that the latter's brother-in-law, Morold, has come to collect the tribute agreed upon. Tristan challenges Morold to single combat, slays him, and sends his head to Ireland in scorn and defiance.

But Morold's sword has dealt Tristan a poisoned wound, for the healing of which he has to go to Ireland, there to be treated by the magic art of Isot, wife of Gurmun. He visits Ireland dis- guised as a merchant (or a minstrel) named Tantris, is healed and made tutor of the Queen's daughter, Isot the Fair, and at length returns to Cornwall, where he finds himself caught up in political complications. Aparty among the nobles is bent on deposing the childless old King Marke. Tristan, as the latter's nephew, is the heir to the throne; but out of fear for his own safety he persuades King Marke, against his will, to marry, proposing Isot the Fair as bride Once more he goes to Ireland.

He wins the country's gratitude by slaying a dragon that is ravaging the land, but is afterward recognised by the two Isots as Tantris: moreover, in his sword they find a notch that corresponds with a splinter that had been left in the head of Morold, whose slayer Tristan is now seen to have been. Isot the Fair goes to slay him in his bath with his own sword, but he manages to buy his life with the promise to find her a rich husband.
The Queen, before the pair set out on the voyage to Cornwall, prepares and gives to Isot's maid Brangaene a love-philtre which is to be secretly given to King Marke and Isot on their wedding-day. On the ship Isot does not conceal her hatred of Tristan, but one day, when the pair are thirsty, they accidentally drink the philtre and fall violently in love with each other. When they reach Cornwall, Brangaene, who is in the secret, takes Isot's place in the King's bed. The lovers deceive the old King in various ways, till at length Tristan has to leave the court.
He flies to Sussex, where he falls in love with and marries the reigning Duke's daughter, Isot of the White Hand. After various other adventures Tristan is wounded in battle. No one can heal him but Isot of Ireland, she is sent for, and it is arranged that the messenger who has gone on the quest is to hoist a blue-and-white sail if she returns in the ship with him, a black sail if he has failed. The blue-and-white sail is hoisted, but the jealous Isot of the White Hand tells the sick man that the sail is black. He dies, and Isot the Fair after him, holding him in her embrace. Isot of the White Hand malignantly buries them on opposite sides of the church, so that even in death they should not be united but from; each grave there springs a mighty oak
